you know we think of this word gene and
it's suffused our culture and it seems
to be sort of an abstract concept that
lies outside ourselves in science you
know people are talking about in
laboratories but family genes have to do
with family it has to do with us it has
to do with how you and I are made are
you know who in this room doesn't have a
relative who's affected by some illness
which you can ultimately track back to
some interaction between genes and and
environment so all of a sudden when I
look back at that at that little thing
it was more than four bits six pages or
seven pages I said to myself you know
this book is really this not good book
it was seven pages then this is really
about families it's about ourselves as
living organisms that emanate out of
these things called genes and that's
sort of the conception of the book you
you wrote this and before I asked you
about you know some of the history here
and some of the amazing figures you
write about you write this with a sense
I mean I get a sense of real urgency
from you that you felt it was it was
important to get this down now because
there's a lot going on in science and
you and I talked about this earlier
today you had a sense that it's really
important for people to begin to
understand themselves not to just leave
this up to the experts
uh-huh well let me just give you a sense
of what's going on in science and this
may help us have this conversation as we
move forward we're trying we're learning
to read and write the human genome and
I'm saying this very flatly because I
let me explain what what reading and
writing the human genome means reading
by reading I mean that you know
obviously may all of you know that in
about 2001 2002 we obtained the sequence
of the human genome and by that I mean
well let's first define what the genome
is genome is the entire repository of
genetic information that is in your
cells that's in an embryo that's in
human embryos and it's written in just
four it's a four alphabet code a C G and
T so if the your genome might read a C
GTCC see I'm making it
g-g-gee and not have memorized it TTT
CCC and so forth but here's what's
interesting about it it this goes on in
humans for 3 billion letters and if you
imagine it as a written as an
encyclopedia this encyclopedia would be
66 full sets of the Encyclopedia
Britannica so it would line up all the
edges of this room and if you picked up
66 for one of these 66 full sets of
Encyclopedia Britannica it would read
ACTG cccc TCC it would be inscrutable to
you and me and yet here's what's amazing
about it yet out of that seemingly
inscrutable four-letter code is built
you and me then everyone else in that
room it's an astonishing fact that that
code becomes you becomes me small
variations in that code are responsible
in some part the difference between you
and me so going back now to understand
what we what the technologies allow us
to do number one is that we're beginning
to read that code and beginning to and I
should emphasize very clearly that we're
beginning to be able to predict what
might be what or what might happen in
your future for some parts of that
genome just to give you one example if
you have the Braca one gene mutation
it's not a hundred percent chance that
you're gonna have breast cancer but your
risk of breast cancer may be ten times
higher than that and then the women who
don't have that particular mutation if
you have a cystic fibrosis gene mutation
in both here both your both parent alone
and from both your father and mother
the chances are nearly a hundred percent
that you'll have that disease in your
future I could tell you that when you
were an embryo if you had the case
access these mutation I could tell you
from your embers from your embryonic
cell I could tell you chances that you
will have that disease is a hundred
percent etc etc etc so that's reading
the genome and now we're getting to more
complicated things I could tell you more
potentially more complicated things
about illness and people have started to
explore
far from there yet but people have sorry
to explore not just illness but I could
tell you complicated things about
potentially identity that's already
entering territory that we should have
some moral concerns about